---
title: Web3 Post
tags: code
---

When I first fell in love with the web, it was a radically different place. Aside from the many technical improvements that have been made, I feel like the general culture of the web has changed a lot as well.

Follow any link today and you'll likely be met with the following scenario:

* Cookie consent pops up, intentionally confusing. Just click "accept all".
* App download banner asks you to install the native app. Dismiss.
* Newsletter modal blocks the site, asking for your email address. Close it.
* Start reading a few paragraphs. Content fades out after that though, you hit a paywall.
* Leave site.

Sound familiar? Notice how everything about that interaction is designed to extract value from your visit. The goal here is not for you to read an article; it's to get your analytics data, your email, your phone and your money.

It's a symptom of a culture that sees the web purely as a business platform, where websites serve as eloborate flytraps that use content as bait. The task of the self-appointed web hustler is to build something, then scale it 

You see it in XXXX. You see it in Twitter accounts where grifters try to monetize their "communities" with platitudes and ebooks. You see it in automated emails asking for sponsored content and link placement.

web3 and NFTs are just the latest evolution of all this. This is the web as envisioned by late-stage capitalism: a giant freemium game where absolutely everyone and everything is a "digital asset" that can be packaged, bought and sold.


We've gotten so used to it that some can't even imagine the web working any other way- but it doesn't have to be like this. Scarcity of ressources and the idea that "ownership" means that noone else can own the same things you do don't apply here. These are concepts of the real world - they don't make sense on the web, except of course as a means to charge money for things that could easily have been free and abundant.

Here's a paradox: because the notion to extract as much value from users as possible is so widespread, you can actually stand out by not going that route. 

Wordle recently took the world by storm. To the utter shock of many, it is just a free piece of content. An open, accessible web game millions can enjoy, no strings attached. Its developer, XXX Wardle, created it and now the world is richer for it. 

I get it - everyone wants to make a buck. Online business need to care about their bottom line, and sustainable monetization can be an answer to 